---
tags: "blog"
layout: "layouts/blog-post.njk"
date: "2019-01-08T12:00:50"
title: "ProjectxChange &#8212; Call for Participation"
slug: "2019-01-09-cln57u"
postHeader: "ProjectxChange &#8212; Call for Participation"
postAuthor: "Mamie Rheingold"
---
\[et\_pb\_section fb\_built=”1″ fullwidth=”on” admin\_label=”Default Blog Post Header” \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ locked=”off” fb\_built=”1″ \_i=”0″ \_address=”0″\]\[et\_pb\_fullwidth\_post\_title \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ meta\_font=”|300|||||||” width\_last\_edited=”on|desktop” title\_font\_size\_tablet=”32px” title\_font\_size\_last\_edited=”on|desktop” meta\_font\_size\_tablet=”16px” meta\_font\_size\_last\_edited=”on|phone” \_i=”0″ \_address=”0.0″\]\[/et\_pb\_fullwidth\_post\_title\]\[/et\_pb\_section\]\[et\_pb\_section fb\_built=”1″ \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ fb\_built=”1″ \_i=”1″ \_address=”1″\]\[et\_pb\_row module\_class=”rxc-narrow-text-wrap ” \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ custom\_padding=”0px||||false|false” \_i=”0″ \_address=”1.0″\]\[et\_pb\_column type=”4\_4″ \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ \_i=”0″ \_address=”1.0.0″\]\[et\_pb\_text \_builder\_version=”3.27.4″ custom\_margin=”|auto||auto|false|false” \_i=”0″ \_address=”1.0.0.0″\]**_RadicalxChange_**  
**_11th floor of the College for Creative Studies – A. Alfred Taubman Center_**  
**_460 W Baltimore St, Detroit, MI 48202, USA_**  
**_March 22-24, 2019_**

If so, we invite you to tap into the 500 leaders, activists, artists, entrepreneurs and scholars that will be attending the inaugural RadicalxChange conference in March.

Applications for ProjectxChange, an interactive project fair and showcase that will take place during the conference, are now open.

ProjectxChange will provide projects the opportunity to share their work and engage with others in a dedicated space. A select few will also present their ideas on the main stage and participate in a dialogue with a handpicked RadicalxChange panel.

ProjectxChange aims to foster a collaborative environment across disciplines and interests. This also means blurring the line between projects and conference attendees as active participants of the larger movement. In particular, we’re looking for projects with a diverse set of asks from the conference audience. Projects that are chosen should be bold and ask for anything and everything that will help you achieve your radical mission. Some ideas:

*   Technical talent to volunteer some time
*   Introductions
*   In-kind donations
*   A reference client
*   Marketing support
*   Help spreading your message
*   Volunteers
*   Access to a specific market, city, etc.

We will be exploring ways to incentivize engagement, implement Radical Markets in the program, and ultimately leverage the conference and its audience to support your project.

Please apply to ProjectxChange [here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpZZfo0JkTUYHzPk_Rx_xWKWPTMQDgUTHbfe9XRPiAGpqchQ/viewform).

_Accepted projects will still need to purchase tickets for the conference._\[/et\_pb\_text\]\[/et\_pb\_column\]\[/et\_pb\_row\]\[/et\_pb\_section\]